# Chapter 1. Basic Introduction

The purpose of this chapter is to provide you with that minimal amount 
of information needed to experiment with MDL while reading this 
document. It is strongly recommended that you do experiment, 
especially upon reaching [chapter 5 (Simple 
Functions)](5-simple-functions.markdown).

## 1.1. Loading MDL [1]

First, catch your rabbit. Somehow get the interpreter running -- the
program in the file `SYS:TS.MDL` in the ITS version or `SYS:MDL.SAV` 
in the Tenex version or `SYS:MDL.EXE` in the Tops-20 version. The 
interpreter will first type out some news relating to MDL, if any, 
then type

    LISTENING-AT-LEVEL 1 PROCESS 1

and then wait for you to type something.

The program which you are now running is an interpreter for the 
language MDL. **All** it knows how to do is interpret MDL expressions. 
There is no special "command language"; you communicate with the
program -- make it do things for you -- by actually typing legal MDL
expressions, which it then interprets. **Everything** you can do at a 
terminal can be done in a program, and vice versa, in exactly the same 
way.

The program will be referred to as just "MDL" (or "the interpreter") 
from here on. There is no ambiguity, since the program is just an 
incarnation of the concept "MDL".

## 1.2. Typing [1]

Typing a character at MDL normally just causes that character to be 
echoed (printed on your terminal) and remembered in a buffer. The only 
characters for which this is normally not true act as follows:

Typing `$` (<kbd>ESC</kbd>) causes MDL to echo dollar-sign and causes 
the contents of the buffer (the characters which you've typed) to be
interpreted as an expression(s) in MDL. When this interpretation is 
done, the result will be printed and MDL will wait for more typing. 
<kbd>ESC</kbd> will be represented by the glyph `$` in this document.

Typing the rubout character (<kbd>DEL</kbd> in the ITS and Top-20 
versions, <kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>A</kbd> in the Tenex version) causes 
the last character in the buffer -- the one most recently typed -- to
be thrown away (deleted). If you now immediately type another rubout,
once again the last character is deleted -- namely the second most
recently typed. Etc. The character deleted is echoed, so you can see 
what you're doing. On some "display" terminals, rubout will "echo" by 
causing the deleted character to disappear. If no characters are in 
the buffer, rubout echoes as a carriage-return line-feed.

Typing <kbd>^@</kbd> (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>@</kbd>) deletes everything 
you have typed since the last `$`, and prints a carriage-return
line-feed.

Typing <kbd>^D</kbd> (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>D</kbd>) causes the current 
input buffer to be typed back out at you. This allows you to see what 
you really have, without the confusing re-echoed characters produced 
by rubout.

Typing <kbd>^L</kbd> (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>L</kbd>) produces the same 
effect as typing <kbd>^D</kbd>, except that, if your terminal is a 
"display" terminal (for example, IMLAC, ARDS, Datapoint), it firsts 
clears the screen.

Typing <kbd>^G</kbd> (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>G</kbd>) causes MDL to stop 
whatever it is doing and act as if an error had occurred ([section 
1.4](#14-errors-simple-considerations-1)). <kbd>^G</kbd> is generally 
most useful for temporary interruptions to check the progress of a 
computation. <kbd>^G</kbd> is "reversible" -- that is, it does not
destroy any of the "state" of the computation it interrupts. To "undo" 
a <kbd>^G</kbd>, type the characters

    <ERRET T>$

(This is discussed more fully far below, in section 16.4.)

Typing <kbd>^S</kbd> (<kbd>CTRL</kbd>+<kbd>S</kbd>) causes MDL to 
**throw away** what it is currently doing and return to a normal 
"listening" state. (In the Tenex and Tops-20 versions, <kbd>^O</kbd> 
also should have the same effect.) <kbd>^S</kbd> is generally most 
useful for aborting infinite loops and similar terrible things. 
<kbd>^S</kbd> **destroys** whatever is going on, and so it is **not** 
reversible.

Most expressions in MDL include "brackets" (generically meant) that 
must be correctly paired and nested. If you end your typing with the 
pair of characters `!$` (<kbd>!</kbd>+<kbd>ESC</kbd>), all currently 
unpaired brackets (but not double-quotes, which bracket strings of 
characters) will automatically be paired and interpretation will 
start. Without the <kbd>!</kbd>, MDL will just sit there waiting for 
you to pair them. If you have improperly nested parentheses, brackets, 
etc., within the expression you typed, an error will occur, and MDL 
will tell you what is wrong.

Once the brackets are properly paired, MDL will immediately echo 
carriage-return and line-feed, and the next thing it prints will be 
the result of the evaluation. Thus, if a plain `$` is not so echoed, 
you have some expression unclosed. In that case, if you have not typed 
any characters beyond the `$`, you can usually rub out the `$` and 
other characters back to the beginning of the unclosed expression. 
Otherwise, what you have typed is beyond the help of rubout and 
<kbd>^@</kbd>; if you want to abort it, use <kbd>^S</kbd>.

MDL accepts and distinguishes between upper and lower case. All 
"built-in functions" must be referenced in upper case.

## 1.3. Loading a File [1]

If you have a program in MDL that you have written as an ASCII file on 
some device, you can "load" it by typing

    <FLOAD file>$

where *file* is the name of the file, in standard operating-system 
syntax, enclosed in "s (double-quotes). Omitted parts of the file name 
are taken by default from the file name `DSK: INPUT >` (in the ITS 
version) or `DSK: INPUT.MUD` (in the Tenex and Tops-20 versions) in 
the current disk directory.

Once you type `$`, MDL will process the text in the file (including 
`FLOAD`s) exactly as if you had typed it on a terminal and followed it 
with `$`, except that "values" produced by the computations are not 
printed. When MDL is finished processing the file, it will print 
`DONE`.

When MDL starts running, it will `FLOAD` the file `MUDDLE INIT` (ITS 
version) or `MUDDLE.INIT` (Tenex and Tops-20 versions), if it exists.

## 1.4. Errors — Simple Considerations [1]

When MDL decides for some reason that something is wrong, the standard 
sequence of evaluation is interrupted and an error function is called. 
This produces the following terminal output:

    *ERROR*
    often-hyphenated-reason
    function-in-which-error-occurred
    LISTENING-AT-LEVEL integer PROCESS integer

You can now interact with MDL as usual, typing expressions and having 
them evaluated. There exist facilities (built-in functions) allowing 
you to find out what went wrong, restart, or abandon whatever was 
going on. In particular, you can recover from an error -- that is,
undo everything but side effects and return to the initial typing
phase -- by typing the following first line, to which MDL will respond
with the second line:

    <ERRET>$
    LISTENING-AT-LEVEL 1 PROCESS 1

If you type the following first line while still in the error state 
(before `<ERRET>`), MDL will print, as shown, the arguments (or 
"parameters or "inputs" or "independent variables") which gave 
indigestion to the unhappy function:

    <ARGS <FRAME <FRAME>>>$
    [ arguments to unhappy function ]

This will be explained by and by.
