# Chapter 18. Machine Words and Bits

The MDL facility for dealing with uninterpreted machine words and bits
involves two data TYPEs: WORD and BITS. A WORD is simply an
uninterpreted machine word, while a BITS is a "pointer" to a set of
bits within a WORD. Operating on WORDs is usually done only when
compiled programs are used (chapter 19).

## 18.1. WORDs

A `WORD` in MDL is a PDP-10 machine word of 36 bits. A `WORD` always
`PRINT`s in "# format", and its contents are always printed in octal
(hence preceded and followed by `*`). Examples:

    #WORD 0                  ;"all 0s"$
    #WORD *000000000000*

    #WORD *2000*             ;"one bit 1"$
    #WORD *000000002000*

    #WORD *525252525252*     ;"every other bit 1"$
    #WORD *525252525252*

`WORD` is its own `PRIMTYPE`; it is also the `PRIMTYPE` of `FIX`,
`FLOAT`, `CHARACTER`, and any other `TYPE` which can fit its data into
one machine word.

A `WORD` cannot be an argument to `+`, `-`, or indeed any `SUBR`s
except for `CHTYPE`, `GETBITS`, `PUTBITS` and several bit-manipulating
functions, all to be described below. Thus any arithmetic bit
manipulation must be done by `CHTYPE`ing a `WORD` to `FIX`, doing the
arithmetic, and then `CHTYPE`ing back to `WORD`. However, bit
manipulation can be done without `CHTYPE`ing the thing to be played
with to a `WORD`, so long as it is of `PRIMTYPE` `WORD`; the result of
the manipulation will be of the same `TYPE` as the original object or
can be `CHTYPE`d to it.

## 18.2. BITS

An object of `TYPE` `BITS` is of `PRIMTYPE` `WORD`, and `PRINT`s just
like a `WORD`. The internal form of a `BITS` is precisely that of a
PDP-10 "byte pointer", which is, in fact, just what a `BITS` is.

For purposes of explaining what a `BITS` is, assume that the bits in a
`WORD` are numbered from **right** to **left**, with the rightmost bit
numbered 0 and the leftmost numbered 35, as in

    35 34 33 ... 2 1 0

(This is not the "standard" ordering: the "standard" one goes from
left to right.)

A `BITS` is most conveniently created via the `SUBR` `BITS`:

    <BITS width:fix right-edge:fix>

returns a `BITS` which "points to" a set of bits *width* wide, with
rightmost bit *right-edge*. Both arguments must be of `TYPE` `FIX`,
and the second is optional, 0 by default.

Examples: the indicated application of `BITS` returns an object of
`TYPE` `BITS` which points to the indicated set of bits in a `WORD`:

| Example       | Returns                            |
|---------------|------------------------------------|
| `<BITS 7>`    | 35 ... 7 **6 ... 0**               |
| `<BITS 4 18>` | 35 ... 22 **21 20 19 18** 17 ... 0 |
| `<BITS 36>`   | ***35 ... 0***                     |

## 18.3. GETBITS

    <GETBITS from:primtype-word bits>

where *from* is an object of `PRIMTYPE` `WORD`, returns a **new**
object whose `TYPE` is `WORD`. This object is constructed in the
following way: the set of bits in *from* pointed to by *bits* is
copied into the new object, right-adjusted, that is, lined up against
the right end (bit number 0) of the new object. All those bits of the
new object which are not copied are set to zero. In other words,
`GETBITS` takes bits from an arbitrary place in *from* and puts them
at the right of a new object. The *from* argument to `GETBITS` is not
affected.

Examples:

    <GETBITS #WORD *777777777777* <BITS 3>>$
    #WORD *000000000007*
    <GETBITS *012345670123* <BITS 6 18>>$
    #WORD *000000000045*

## 18.4. PUTBITS

    <PUTBITS to:primtype-word bits from:primtype-word>

where *to* and *from* are of `PRIMTYPE` `WORD`, returns a **copy** of
*to*, modified as follows: the set of bits in *to* which are pointed
to by *bits* are replaced by the appropriate number of rightmost bits
copied from *from* (optional, 0 by default). In other words: `PUTBITS`
takes bits from the right of *from* and stuffs them into an arbitrary
position in a copy of *to*. **None** of the arguments to `PUTBITS` is
affected.

Examples:

    <PUTBITS #WORD *777777777777* <BITS 6 3>>$
    #WORD *777777777007*
    <PUTBITS #WORD *666777000111* <BITS 5 15> #WORD *123*>$
    #WORD *666776300111*
    <PUTBITS #WORD *765432107654* <BITS 18>>$
    #WORD *765432000000*

## 18.5. Bitwise Boolean Operations

Each of the `SUBR`s `ANDB`, `ORB`, `XORB`, and `EQVB` takes arguments
of `PRIMTYPE` `WORD` and returns a `WORD` which is the bitwise Boolean
"and", inclusive "or", exclusive "or", or "equivalence" (inverse of
exclusive "or"), respectively, of its arguments. Each takes any number
of arguments. If no argument is given, a `WORD` with all bits off
(`ORB` and `XORB`) or on (`ANDB` and `EQVB`) is returned. If only one
argument is given, it is returned unchanged but `CHTYPE`d to a `WORD`.
If more than two arguments are given, the operator is applied to the
first two, then applied to that result and the third, etc. Be sure not
to confuse `AND` and `OR` with `ANDB` and `ORB`.

## 18.6. Bitwise Shifting Operations

    <LSH from:primtype-word amount:fix>

returns a **new** `WORD` containing the bits in *from*, shifted the
number of bits specified by *amount* (mod 256, says the hardware).
Zero bits are brought in at the end being vacated; bits shifted out at
the other end are lost. If *amount* is positive, shifting is to the
left; if *amount* is negative, shifting is to the right. Examples:

    <LSH 8 6>$
    #WORD *000000001000*
    <LSH 8 -6>$
    #WORD *000000000000*

    <ROT from:primtype-word amount:fix>

returns a **new** `WORD` containing the bits from *from*, rotated the
number of bits specified by *amount* (mod 256, says the hardware).
Rotation is a cyclic bitwise shift where bits shifted out at one end
are put back in at the other. If *amount* is positive, rotation is to
the left; if *amount* is negative, rotation is to the right. Examples:

    <ROT 8 6>$
    #WORD *000000001000*
    <ROT 8 -6>$
    #WORD *100000000000*
