# Chapter 23. MDL as a System Process

This chapter treats MDL considered as executing in an
operating-system process, and interactions between MDL and other
operating-system processes. See also section 21.8.13.

## 23.1. TIME

`TIME` takes any number of arguments, which are evaluated but
ignored, and returns a `FLOAT` giving the number of seconds of CPU
time the MDL process has used so far. `TIME` is often used in
machine-level debugging to examine the values of its arguments, by
having MDL's superior process (say, DDT) plant a breakpoint in the
code for `TIME`.

## 23.2. Names

    <UNAME>

returns a `STRING` which is the "user name" of MDL's process. This is
the "uname" process-control variable in the ITS version and the
logged-in directory in the Tenex and Tops-20 versions.

    <XUNAME>

returns a `STRING` which is the "intended user name" of MDL's
process. This is the "xuname" process-control variable in the ITS
version and identical to `<UNAME>` in the Tenex and Tops-20 versions.

    <JNAME>

returns a `STRING` which is the "job name" of MDL's process. This is
the "jname" process-control variable in the ITS version and the
`SETNM` name in the Tenex and Tops-20 versions. The characters belong
to the "sixbit" or "printing" subset of ASCII, namely those between
`<ASCII *40*>` and `<ASCII *137*>` inclusive.

    <XJNAME>

returns a `STRING` which is the "intended job name" of MDL's process.
This is the "xjname" process-control variable in the ITS version and
identical to `<JNAME>` in the Tenex and Tops-20 versions.

## 23.3. Exits

    <LOGOUT>

attempts to log out the process in which it is executed. It will
succeed only if the MDL is the top-level process, that is, it is
running disowned or as a daemon. If it succeeds, it of course never
returns. If it does not, it returns `#FALSE ()`.

    <QUIT>

causes MDL to stop running, in an orderly manner. In the ITS version,
it is equivalent to a `.LOGOUT 1` instruction. In the Tenex and
Tops-20 versions, it is equivalent to a control-C signal, and control
passes to the superior process.

    <VALRET string-or-fix>

("value return") seldom returns. It passes control back up the
process tree to the superior of MDL, passing its argument as a
message to that superior. If it does return, the value is `#FALSE
()`. If the argument is a `STRING`, it is passed to the superior as a
command to be executed, via `.VALUE` in the ITS version and `RSCAN`
in the Tops-20 version. If the argument is a `FIX`, it is passed to
the superior as the "effective address" of a `.BREAK 16`, instruction
in the ITS version and ignored in other versions.

## 23.4. Inter-process Communication

All of the `SUBR`s in this section are available only in the ITS
version.

The IPC ("inter-process communication") device is treated as an I/O
device by ITS but not explicitly so by MDL: that is, it is never
`OPEN`ed. It allows MDL to communicate with other ITS processes by
means of sending and receiving messages. A process identifies itself
as sender or recipient of a message with an ordered pair of "sixbit"
`STRING`s, which are often but not always `<UNAME>` and `<JNAME>`. A
message has a "body" and a "type".

### 23.4.1. SEND and SEND-WAIT

    <SEND othern1 othern2 body type mynamel myname2>

    <SEND-WAIT othern1 othern2 body type mynamel myname2>

both send an IPC message to any job that is listening for it as
*othern1* *othern2*. *body* must be either a `STRING`, or a `UVECTOR`
of objects of `PRIMTYPE` `WORD`. *type* is an optional `FIX`, `0` by
default, which is part of the information the other guy receives. The
last two arguments are from whom the message is to be sent. These are
optional, and `<UNAME>` and `<JNAME>` respectively are used by
default. `SEND` returns a `FALSE` if no one is listening, while
`SEND-WAIT` hangs until someone wants it. Both return `T` if someone
accepts the message.

### 23.4.2. The "IPC" Interrupt

When your MDL process receives an IPC message, `"IPC"` occurs
(chapter 21). A handler is called with either four or six arguments
gleaned from the message. *body*, *type*, *othern1*, and *othern2*
are supplied only if they are not this process's `<UNAME>` and
`<JNAME>`.

There is a built-in `HANDLER` for the `"IPC"` interrupt, with a
handler named `IPC-HANDLER` and `0` in the `PROCESS` slot. The
handler prints out on the terminal the *body*, whom it is from, the
*type* if not `0`, and whom it is to if not `<UNAME>` `<JNAME>`. If
the *type* is `1` and the *body* is a `STRING`, then, after the
message information is printed out, the `STRING` is `PARSE`d and
`EVAL`uated.

### 23.4.3. IPC-OFF

`<IPC-OFF>` stops all listening on the IPC device.

### 23.4.4. IPC-ON

    <IPC-ON myname1 myname2>

causes listening on the IPC device as *myname1* *myname2*. If no
arguments are provided, listening is on `<UNAME>` `<JNAME>`. When a
message arrives, `"IPC"` occurs.

MDL is initially listening as `<UNAME>` `<JNAME>` with the built-in
`HANDLER` set up on the `"IPC"` interrupt with a priority of `1`.

### 23.4.5. DEMSIG

    <DEMSIG daemon:string>

signals to ITS (directly, not via the IPC device) that the daemon
named by its argument should run now. It returns `T` if the daemon
exists, `#FALSE ()` otherwise.