# The MDL Programming Language

S. W. Galley and Greg Pfister

## Transcriber's notes

This document has been transcribed by [Mark
Trapp](https://marktrapp.com) and [Tara
McGrew](https://github.com/taradinoc) from a [PDF maintained by the
Defense Technical Information
Center](https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA070930).  It attempts
to be as faithful to the original as possible deviating only to adopt
modern formatting techniques, account for limitations of Markdown and
the web, and add links where appropriate.

To this end, the original language has been maintained as much as
humanly possible.  When we've noticed an error in the original text,
we've indicated it with *[sic]*.  If the text requires clarification,
the notes will be marked clearly like so:

!!! note "Transcriber's note"
    This is a transcriber's note.

If you do notice an error in this current version, feel free to
[create an issue](https://github.com/taradinoc/mdl-docs/issues) or
[submit a pull request](https://github.com/taradinoc/mdl-docs/pulls).

## Copyright

Copyright didn't used to be automatic, as it is in today's world.

Various factors need to be considered and determining the copyright
status of a work can be involved: What country or countries was it
published in?  When was it published?  Was an appropriate copyright
noticed included (even though they are not required anymore, proper
copyright notices used to be required and if they were either missing
or inadequate in some way, it could result in loss of copyright on
the work involved.) Another factor to consider is if any required
filings were made with the U.S. Copyright Office, and more.

Due to the various factors, which have changed over time, [Cornell's
Copyright Information Center](http://copyright.cornell.edu/)
publishes a guide that can be useful in helping to determine the
copyright status of a work:
[http://copyright.cornell.edu/resources/publicdomain.cfm](http://copyright.cornell.edu/resources/publicdomain.cfm).

For some background of the MDL Programming Language document: Various
versions of it were published from 1972 to at least 1979.  Some had a
copyright notice and some did not.  Greg Pfister, the original author
of the document, says the 1972 version does not.  Also, the 1979
version that was submitted to the U.S. Government and that is on
file with the Defense Technical Information Center, and linked to
above, does not.  In addition, this document was not registered with
the U.S. Copyright Office at any point.

However, a copy of the 1979 version from the MIT Library does contain
a copyright notice.  This shows that it was originally published
without a copyright notice and that it was added by MIT to other
copies later.  It seems that at least 7 years had gone by (and
possibly longer since it is not known when MIT actually stamped their
copy with a notice about 1979) since the earlier versions do not have
this.

The chart provided by Cornell's Copyright Information Center
indicates that publishing with a copyright notice was required for
the 1972 version, and with either a notice or subsequent registration
with the U.S. Copyright Office within 5 years (for the later
versions) and that loss of copyright would result if this were not
done.

In addition, this document is the result of work first produced in
the performance of a contract to the U.S. Government.  While a work
prepared by an officer or employee of the federal government as part
of that person's official duties is free of copyright this does not
necessarily extend to contractors.

Indeed, FAR 52.227-14(c)(1)(ii) lets contractors assert copyright
when it says that "when authorized to assert copyright to the data,
the Contractor shall affix the applicable copyright notices of 17
U.S.C. 401 or 402, and an acknowledgment of Government sponsorship
(including contract number)."

While the MDL Programming Language document submitted to the U.S. 
Government does include an acknowledgment of Government sponsorship
(including contract number) it does not contain the required copyight
notice (assuming that MIT was authorized to assert copyright on the
data submitted to the government in the first place because FAR does
say "when authorized to assert copyright.")

This also shows that, if MIT wanted to claim a copyright on what they
sent to the U.S. Government, assuming that their contract permitted
them to, they needed to include a copyright notice.  This backs up
the information provided by Cornell's Copyright Information Center
that a copyright notice was required (again, assuming they were
authorized to assert copyright in the first place.)

At the very least this means we can say that the MDL Programming
Language as submitted to the U.S. Government (and very probably all
of the other versions that did not contain copyright notices) are
therefore in the public domain in the United States for failure to
comply with the required formalities.  This means you're free to
download, modify and redistribute this document.  People outside of
the United States must check the copyright laws of their country
before downloading or redistributing.

However: Even if it should be found that this document is somehow
under copyright, the U.S. Government's copy has the [distribution
statement
"A"](https://www.dodcui.mil/Distribution-Statements/),
meaning that it is approved for public release and distribution is
unlimited.  This classification and the information above is the
basis under which a good-faith effort to preserve an otherwise-public
document has been made.
